Alright so let's talk about Access modifiers.
At the very simplest level,
you would identify some class members,
field and internal methods as private,
as some as public methods,
that a consuming class would need.
The public methods would need the public face
or the contract shown to the consumers,
which need to access an instance of the object
for some information or some function.
The private members would be those fields or methods
that are needed only for the class to perform it's work,
and used only by the class internally itself.
It gets a bit more complicated than that,
because we might wanna subclass to have access
to some internal private members of it's parent class,
especially if we wanna create methods
that override the parent class.
The Protected Access Modifier was created
for this type of access.
In addition, if we have a group of classes in a package,
it might be assumed that these classes have relationships
that aren't strictly parent-child relationships,
and that these relationships may require access
to some of the internals of a class.
The default modifier, which has the description,
package or package-private,
but does not have a keyword,
allows this type of access.
It should be noted that the Protected Access Modifier
in addition to allowing a subclass access to its members,
also allows classes in the same package access to members
with the protected modifier.
So let's look at a table that shows the modifiers
in order of least Restrictive to most restrictive.
So the first Access modifier is public
and using the Public Modifier allows access to a member,
regardless of package or hierarchy.
Any class in any package can access this type of member.
So it's available to classes in any package.
It's available to classes in the same package,
but it's also available to sub classes.
Next Access modifier we're talking about is protected.
They're using the protected modifier,
allows access to any class in the same package.
In addition, any subclass of the class,
regardless of the package it is in,
will have access to these members in a restricted fashion.
So the Protected Access Modifier isn't available
to classes in any package.
It's available to classes in the same package.
And it's also available to sub classes.
Next is not using an access modifier, or no modifier.
And this is the default.
When you specify a no modifier,
the access is package, package-private
or default access as it is known.
This access allows the member to be accessed
by any other class in the same package.
So it's not available to classes in any package.
It is available to classes in the same package,
and it's not available to subclasses.
But lastly, we're talking now about private,
the Private Access Modifier.
So using the private modifier prevents any class,
other than the one the members is declared in,
from accessing the member.
So note that nested classes
can access the outer class's private member
So it's not available to classes in any package,
is not available to classes in the same package,
and it's also not available to subclasses.
Alright, so with that said, In this video,
let's start talking about the constructs the rules
and implications of each modifier with the top of member
that it's applied to.
In the future videos in this section
we'd discuss best practises
in encapsulation techniques in Java.
Unlike methods, fields in a subclass hide those
of the same name in the superclass.
Alright so create a new project called encapsulation
which I've done.
We wanna create a new class here.
I'm (murmur) create a package at the same time.
So I'm going to create package A and class nine superclass.
So mostly using the feature of IntelliJ
that it creates a package for us automatically.
You can see that it's done that.
Now you'll paste in the code.
Right, so this is the code.
Now the public class here superclass
has four attributes, as you can see,
we will be able to see when I scroll down, there we go.
We've got the four there on screen,
each has been modified with a different access modifiers,
you can see and also method test access
that actually prints them.
We've also got a main method, (murmur) instantiating,
the superclass, but also the package A class,
which we'll talk about now.
So this package A class
has no defined relationship to superclass,
but does have one method
that proves the attributes of superclass.
And you can see that method on screen there now.
We're doing this to test access modifiers.
And you'll see that when I run this,
you'll have access to all
but the private field of superclass.
So if you run this code now,
so looking at the output we can see here that superclass
has access to all its own attributes.
This dot public int was 10.
This dot package int was 20.
Protected int was 30, and profit int was 40.
A non subclass class has access to all but private fields
of another class in the same package.
And we're seeing that with the output superclass public int,
it was 10 packages, 20 protected int 30.
Now, I don't think I've introduced any surprises here.
But I do wanna complicate matters a bit now.
I'm gonna take the opportunity
to create a new package as well.
So this one's going to be package B dot parents class.
So obviously a new package and a new class.
I'll paste the code in.
Okay, so there's our code.
This is class whose fall has a class
that you can see parent class.
And that extends to superclass
that we've just looked at earlier in this video.
And that's in another package, package A
and you see it's kinda main with their
to do some instantiation.
And so it's a got the test method as well.
And you can see they're actually confirming
what access level we've got to the various fields.
They're also using the use of super to get access
to the protected.
And we've also got here package B class
as simply as a method test access,
printing only the attributes available to it on superclass.
So let's actually run this.
You see here non subclass, class in a different package
has access only to a public classes as public fields,
this case superclass dot public int,
in package B parent class has access
to only its parents, public and protected attributes
if it's declared in.
And it's just gone off screen,
another package and you can see this is dot public int
protected int and use of super dot protected int
noting that the code to supple using super
is superfluous here in this context.
So essentially, here, we've proven that we've got access
to the protected fields
through the hierarchical references like this and super.
So let's add some code here.
We wanna get back to the test access method
of the class we've just created here, the parent class.
Let's post the code here.
This code you can see is instantiating
a new parent class object
within a method of the parent class itself.
Then the difference here is subtle.
We're not accessing the protected member
for a direct call through a hierarchical qualifier like this
or super,
rather we're accessing the attribute through a new instance.
If you run this, new parent class,
dot protected int equals 30.
You see the code compiles and (murmur)
Alright let's paste some more code into the same method,
below what we've just previously pasted in.
So what happens here,
if we access through an instance of a superclass
we've try to access as the case may be.
As you can see the code here fails
to compile superclasses defined in another package
in creating an instance of it even in a child class of it,
doesn't allow access to this protected field
as you can see there.
And we've got confirmation protected,
int has protected access in package A dot superclass.
So let's cut it that out and replace it
with this code.
Alright, so you can see there that
that code actually executes.
Alright, so let's end the video here.
In the next one we'll start talking more
about the Protected Access Modifier,
specifically because that's very ripe
for tricky exam questions. See you in the next video.